---
title: "Name a famous brogrammer"
date: '2012-04-27'
description:
categories:
tags: []

layout: post
type: draft
---
So I took a year off of writing for a bunch of reasons and I figured what better way to come back then throw some lit matches into a gasoline soaked topic, amirite?

So go ahead, name a famous brogrammer. What's that? You can't? Huh, that's weird. Maybe that's because they don't really exist? At least not in any quantity of any consequence? What we have is what we've always had.

What started out as satire (and still is quite good satire) slowly morphed into a supposed "movement", a "new culture", a mythical monster dwarfing both the satire and the actual bros, should there be any. There is no growing brogramming movement. There's the same shit there's always been. The collective delusion about the "rise of brogramming" is far more interesting than any actual bros you happen to know. It's simply a manifestation of the deepest insecurities of the dominant nerd culture. It's the nerd stereotype's alterego, taking its rightful place next to the wise neckbeard. The idea of this new and rising"movement" resonates, and is believed so credulously, because of our collective insecurity about what we do and how it's viewed.

Worst of all is that the existence of the phantom brogramming movement gives us someone to blame for all that sexism. It's not "us", it's "them". Those guys who picked on us in high school are now making drunken asses of themselves and harassing women. It's "them". The ones that none of us can name.